.. link: 
.. description: My opinion on version differences, leaderboards, etc.
.. tags: speedrunning
.. date: 2013/12/05 10:20:04
.. title: Version differences and comparisons
.. slug: version-differences-and-comparisons

A lot of fuss has been going on recently (and ongoing for quite some time) about version differences between games such as Ocarina of Time and Super Mario 64 mainly (or at least the most vocally). On the Ocarina of Time side, Cosmo got a fair bit of flak about previously (has since been defeated) gaining the Any% ~World Record~ on an "obscure" Chinese release of the N64 (with differences that make it faster than both N64 and VC), the iQue, instead of the generally accepted Virtual Console release. While on the Super Mario 64 side, the main fight is between N64 and VC which removes nearly all lag, which as a result a lot of challenge in lag reduction and saves a bunch of extra time.

I don't have as big of an interest in the Ocarina of Time side of this because I don't run the game, however it gives me perspective on the other side of the fence. In the OOT camp N64 is pretty acceptable (generally because a glitch exclusive to 1.0 version which was only released on the N64 I believe), but so is VC due to it being a "Faster Official Release" (less lag mainly). So at this point the community has already established that they only care about "This game runs the fastest and it's an official release", that seems to be the main criteria. Given what I interpret the OOT community to care about only being the fastest I was pretty shocked to see the outrage over the iQue. Sure it's not easy to get a hold of, cheap, etc; neither is a 1.0 N64 cart from my understanding. Do you have to get a "World Record"? No. You could buy an iQue in order to save 13~ seconds, or you could just continue playing on your version regardless and stop worrying about some "Obscure Chinese console". You can still be a competitive player regardless of being on a slightly slower platform, you just get less free time.

As for Super Mario 64, I have a bit more interest into the fight between N64 and VC as I run the game myself on the "slower" platform N64. A lot of the "bigger names" in the SM64 speedrunning community detest VC; the general reason seems to be around the lines of it being "less skillful". The estimate that gets thrown around (if I remember correctly) off the top of my head is that VC saves 1:30 in a 120 star run vs N64 with good lag reduction strats. That's certainly more than 13~ seconds, a big amount of time in a very technical game. You also don't need to put in any effort into lag reduction, making VC less of a challenge in some cases, as you don't have to fight with the camera as much. Eventually after some fighting among pretty much everyone the Japanese leaderboard separated VC from N64 (and others followed along) much of the problem got settled. While people still argue about the version, many less argue about the comparison. 

While neither of these cases are exactly clear cut, they're all technically Nintendo released versions of the same games, I feel that the main issue is comparing apples to oranges. Why should we directly compare different versions that have big enough differences that people fight almost every day over them? The simpler solution is to just separate everything and if anyone cares enough they can compare on their own (or with automated help). Sure it would be nice to know the best times for each version, but that doesn't mean everything should be combined in the first place. If somebody wants to compare the best VC time with iQue times they can check it on their own. If someone wants to compare PAL sm64 to Japanese/American NTSC they can do so also. It's not really that difficult to do, even on a separated leaderboard.
